Good morning, Rebecca.
We have our first submitter on Zoom.
We swap between Zoom and in the room. So we'll leave it to you.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
You are our first submitter on the Employment Leave Bill, so we're
pleased to hear from you. And that includes time for questions, which we'll leave
over to you to allow time. Over to you.
Thank you. Thank you for having me.
I'm Rebecca Graham, and I am the National Director for Parents of Visually
Impaired New Zealand. We're a national charity that provides
support and advocacy for parents and families of a blind,
low vision, deaf blind, or vision impaired child, young person.
Some of our members have adults that they provide care for.
The reason we submitted on this bill
is a lot of our families have one parent
who is the primary caregiving parent, and they work part-time,
and they're often juggling part-time work in and around caregiving
duties.
And it's a really important role. It's certainly much needed.
And we are concerned that this bill actually will
penalize our families a little bit.
I'm also aware that while we're submitting on behalf of our families, that
within the wider disability sector, this is often the case as well,
with people providing care for aging parents, and
spouses, and other family members.
But certainly our focus is on our parents and our
families.
With care responsibilities, of course, comes reduced
hours, reduced income, and reduced workforce participation.
One of the core issues with the bill as proposed is that it
ties entitlements and leave entitlements and sick leave
entitlements to the number of hours worked.
And this creates a type of
systemic disadvantage
for our families, and particularly for those who are working part-time hours
or who are already working fewer hours because of disability
or caregiving related needs. Under the proposed
hourly accrual, it means that fewer hours means
less annual leave. It means less sick leave.
And for those who are casual workers, it means
extremely limited leave.
And for casual workers in particular too, there's a loading that
gets replaced instead of leave, and it makes it much harder for them to take time
off. And that is quite concerning because for our
parents, particularly when you're providing care for someone, you do need
to be able to juggle things like appointments,
things like if the person you're caring for gets sick, being able to take leave to
care for them, being able to attend meetings.
I'm not sure if any of you have kids in education, but
most of us have what's called IEPs, which is an individual education
plan. That happens generally six monthly, and it just
about always is in work hours because of course that's when all the
other paid professionals can attend.
So our parents have to take time off work or rearrange their work schedule to be
able to attend.
And those changes, while small, actually do
have an impact for our families who are already facing disadvantage.
I'm also aware of the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, thinking about Articles 27 and
28, which is about employment. And the most recent
IMM, International Monitoring Mechanism,
report and the concluding observations for New Zealand, which talked about
employment and talked about strengthening employment and talked about
strengthening the fairness. And
that this bill, while it doesn't contradict that, it sort of
undermines it, and it certainly isn't upholding what is being recommended
there. The other issue, of course, is the
compounding hardship that this
bill allows to happen with about
21% of disabled children in New Zealand already live in
households experiencing material hardship.
And that is nearly twice as much when compared to non-disabled
children. And one of those reasons for that is that
the need for someone to be in that caregiving role, they're not being paid the
same. And this bill really does undermine some of
that really important leave that supports families and supports
whanau. It just creates it harder.
It really does. Reducing leave pay to the lowest
hourly rate creates a financial disincentive to take leave when sick.
We don't want our parents working when they're sick.
We want them to be able to rest, to look after themselves.
We certainly don't want their health worsening, and we don't want the poorer
long-term health outcomes that come when you're unable to take leave and look after
yourself.
So,
that very quick summary. We do wish to
see a retaining of the minimum of four weeks annual leave
regardless of hours worked. We do want to maintain
universal sick leave entitlements and not have them reduced by hours
worked.
We do want to retain access to leave for casual
workers who demonstrate regular work patterns.
And we also want to ensure that leave continues to
accrue during ACC caregiving and return to work periods.
We would like to retain current pay calculation methods so that workers are
not financially penalized for taking leave.
And
our concern is that there hasn't been a disability or
caregiving impact assessment before progressing this bill, and it would be
really good to have that more formally undertaken.And I
am going to stop there. So you've got, by my
calculation, three minutes for questions. If you have any questions.
If not, that is fine.
Thank you, Rebecca. We already have two ready for you, one from Carl Bates.
Yeah. Thanks very much, Chair. And look, really appreciate
some of the challenges that you've referred to and things that we can look at in
the bill process. The bit where I'm a little bit stuck is around the
sick leave question. So if you're a parent that
works half a day
every week on, say, a Monday morning,
your contention is that that parent should essentially be
able to have 10 weeks in a row sick leave, i.e.
be able to take every Monday morning as sick leave for
legitimate reasons maybe,
but essentially do that while their colleagues who work
full-time
wouldn't
be able to take 10 weeks sick leave
consecutively. And I just can't see where
you can argue that that's fair either on other
employees or on the employer who has to carry that cost.
And it makes me wonder if actually that's
disadvantageous to parents
like those that you're referring to who need part-time work,
because employers understand the higher cost of having part-time
work.
That is a hypothetical situation, and I'm not aware that that actually
occurs in reality.
I can give you examples of where that happens in reality.
So let's not go down that hypothetical
debate.
Yeah. I can see what you're saying, and that is a challenge for the select
committee to work through in terms of how do you uphold that.
And I think that's where having a proper
disability and caregiving type assessment would be really useful, because that
would then give the select committee that kind of economic
and expertise which would be able to provide
you with actually what is happening here, and what
could we do so that
your employees don't feel like someone's taking the mick.
But also, equivalently, our
parents are able to be supported and take the leave they need.
Thank you.
Because we do want our parents to be in paid work.
That is
a huge thing. We would like to support that.
Thank you. We've got one more question from Shanan Halbert.
Tena koe, Rebecca. Mihi ana ki a koe te outane.
Thanks very much for that submission.
I wondered if you could walk us through a real-life example of a
family that potentially you've worked with and what
these impacts will mean. But secondly, point to an example
where the impact assessment has been done in previous
work and why that would be beneficial in this instance.
Sure. So what we find
with our real-life families is when they don't have flexibility,
it's usually the mum,
and not always, but it's often the mum, the mum just quits.
And this particularly happens when the child ages out of school, because when the
child's in school, there's some support there.
Once the child ages out of school, there's nothing for that young
person to go into often, and then it's the mum, it's the mum who
quits work because they then have these extra demands that they
have to juggle, and they can't figure out how to do that if they don't have
flexible work. There is some flexible
work out there, but if you're thinking about a mum, they've got a
kid, they've had to work these part-time casualized hours,
they often don't have the luxury of having the types of professional work
that offers you the sort of flexibility that some of us enjoy.
And they're the families that I'm most concerned about because they're the ones
most at risk. They haven't had the luxury of being able to retrain or be in
professional jobs.
Thank you.
And that creates that type of poverty we're seeing, where someone has to
quit work. They're not having access to it.
Can I give you-
Rebecca, I'm so sorry to interrupt. We have reached the end of your time.
Oh.
We have a very, very full day.
Look at me blathering on.
No, look, it's lovely, and thank you so much for your participation in the process.
We really appreciate it.
We will need to move on now, so thank you, and have a great day.
Thanks.
And we have our next submitter all ready on Zoom.
We have got Mike Chapman, Chair of New Zealand Ethical Employers Incorporated.
Mike, you've probably heard this all before.
Ten minutes, includes time for questions, and we're over to you now.
Marina.
Our members employ over 20,000 people.
A lot of those workers are casual and seasonal workers, so our
submission focuses on that.
We've got four asks, and I'll go through them very quickly because hopefully our
written submission is clear enough.
First is we're suggesting that the committee
tighten or clarify the treatment of standard hours, additional hours,
and casual hours so that they reflect the
work patterns that
the people who are employed by our members actually work in.
Notional rosters also need, in our second
request, to really focus on how
our sector works. We're affected by the weather.
We're affected by whether fruit or vegetables
are ripe, and also market realities.
The market orders may dictate when things can be done.
The third request relates to the 12.5%
compensation.
We're a bit confused about this. So
non-permanent workers get 12.5% paid upfront.
Permanent workers don't. The thing about sick
leave is it's taken when it's needed.
So why would you pay a seasonal worker, a
casual worker, 12.5% at the start before they've
taken any sick leave, whereas your permanent worker is in
a different situation, where you assess that sick leave is taken out of the
12.5%?Yeah, the bill's doing a fantastic
thing. It's clarifying an area which has been a
massive problem in terms of just trying to do things
right, and so we really support that.
And therefore, our fourth request is we're really interested, when this
bill becomes law, that really good worked-up examples are
provided by MBIE, so that employers and workers
can make the bill work and make it work well. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mike. That's incredibly helpful and constructive.
Do I have any questions from members?
If not, can I say, Mike, that is not a lack of interest.
That is a very comprehensive and constructive submission, so really appreciate it.
Thank you, and I can see our officials writing feverishly in the background.
So, we'll give you a few minutes back in your day.
Thank you very much. Thanks for your time.
Thanks so much, Mike.
Cheers, Mike.
Cheers. Bye.
Right.
Our next submitter, we have the New Zealand Airline Pilots Association, I think in
the room. Wonderful. Welcome, Imogen.
Hello.
You've heard it all before. You've got 10 minutes.
We don't need to rush you to the table.
Thank you.
And so that 10 minutes includes time for questions, so if you can leave some time,
that'd be great.
Awesome. Thank you.
Obviously here to represent NZALPA as a part of our legal team.
So we look after 83 different employer groups, and we
advocate for fair employment conditions, safety, wellbeing, and
operational integrity within New Zealand's highly regulated
aviation sector.
So this submission today, obviously we'd like to discuss our concerns about the
interaction with aviation's unique operational realities, including
irregular hours, complex rostering, and fatigue management
obligations.
NZALPA would like to see sector-specific exemptions and continued
collaboration to ensure the bill promotes clarity and fairness
without undermining aviation safety, collective bargaining outcomes,
and operational stability for our regulators.
In terms of talking about each of our sort of big-ticket items separately, the
categories of working hours is one of our biggest issues that we are
currently looking at with the proposed bill.
The introduction of standard, additional, and casual hour
classifications represents significant departure from our
existing conditions. Aviation rostering is
highly complex and demand driven.
No working shift or rostering pattern is completely the same.
We've got weather constraints, we've got operational demands, flight
cancellations, the current constraints that we're facing with fuel prices and
the economy.
We've got a lot of demands to look at in that space.
One of our main concerns was the notional rostering pattern, and
if we were looking at how the labor inspectorate would apply the 13-week
period, there is no particular 13 weeks that would actually look
the same no matter what combination that you could actually draw from
the rostering patterns. So in terms of from an equity
perspective, we would like to sort of understand a little bit more about
whether or not there would be any exemptions in terms of application in that space
or how that would particularly work.
So that's one of the big items for us.
And in terms of talking about annual leave and sick leave accruals
all together at the same time, given the fact
that we do have varying different types of
shifts, when we're looking at standby callbacks, there's no particular
hours implemented. We would like to understand how
we would apply that in terms of a regular shift pattern.
It's
very different for every different employee.
We also, when we're looking at the sick leave pro-proration, a lot of our
employees are actually part-time, and we have sometimes three to five different
categorizations of part-time employees across our different collective
agreements. So when we're looking at how the part-time piece
would work, we would see, in terms of the fatigue management piece, a lot
of our part-time employees being significantly impacted within the aviation
side and within other public services.
Obviously, heightened sick leave is a common thing
every day. With the bereavement leave and the family
violence leave part day entitlements, at the moment it's
near impossible for us to ensure our employees to have part day shifts given
the fact that they are shifts that can't be disrupted 9 times out of
10. So it'd be very hard for us to see part day entitlements to be
enacted.
The otherwise working day test, if the statutory 50%
test overrides bargain provisions, members risk indirect
disadvantage, loss of certainty, increased disputes, and compliance
uncertainty.
Leave payments,
what we're sort of looking at as another big-ticket item is the reconciliation
piece. Given that
we have obviously different rostering constraints, if
we were to agree to some form of notional roster, we would have
to see, obviously, the next pay period or agreements between the parties
of the collective agreements to agree to a reconciliation
period, which would actually be really hard for us.
And we've sort of projected that the wage arrears claims would go through the roof
in our sector, given if we can't manage how these reconciliation
periods are, and we would rely on employees coming forward
to us consistently to point out that their leave accruals haven't
been administered correctly.
The proposed leave compensation payment of 12.5%
may be appropriate for genuine casual employment but represents a
concerning shift for permanent employees.
Under the bill, additional hours worked beyond standard hours would no longer
enhance leave entitlements. In aviation, variable and
extended hours are inherent to permanent employment.
The approach effectively recharacterizes ordinary work as quasi-casual,
erodes leave value over time, and risks undermining fatigue and
safety frameworks.When we talk about the
remediation of historical non-compliance, given that the
vast majority of our employer groups are shaped by the
current Holidays Leave Act provisions, and given the complex
rostering,
current sort of remediation in terms of rest and meal breaks,
arrears claims, and things like that, we do rely on the calculations that are
going through the Holidays Act. And for us to sort of move
away from the current precedents in place would create a huge
ripple effect through all of our collective agreements with how rostering works
and how leave will be calculated.
To sort of conclude, our sort of
big-ticket items are we really would like to see greater flexibility in terms of
the classification of working hours,
to recommend to become aligned with the operational realities of
aviation work, and that no day is the same.
Support is given to obviously cashing up 25% of annual leave
entitlements, as long as it obviously remains in that voluntary space.
Standard leave entitlements and accrual mechanisms, we'd like to see some
form of exemption in that space, given that we can't
see there being any certainty around the sick leave and annual leave accruals from
an equity perspective, given that all of the roster periods derived
are completely different. And we would have to negotiate on a
notional roster that we could have set in place, but the
realized hours would automatically create a reconciliation
every single time. So we'd like to obviously stick with the status
quo.
A clear and adaptable definition of part-day leave should be included in the
legislation, allowing mutual agreement on its application within operational
context. The statutory otherwise working day test should
operate as a default mechanism to avoid overriding collectively
bargained provisions, with contractual provisions prevailing if they're more
preferable. Leave payment calculations should reflect actual
earnings, including variable components, to preserve fairness and economic
protection for employees with fluctuating income patterns.
A hybrid model for alternative holiday entitlements is recommended,
allowing hourly accruals to be into full days' worth of
leave, with a minimum entitlement floor for employees working on public
holidays. And clearly for something both employees and employers
would like, flexibility in terms of pay statements.
We
have sort of anticipated a huge reconciliation period that would
happen.
And obviously, sector-specific accommodations are necessary for the
remediation of historical non-compliance.
At the end of the day, we do just have considerable concerns around the
rostering constraints and what that's going to mean for accruals and
correct application.
Does anyone have any questions?
Yes.
Thank you.
So we have three questions lined up-
Cool
... and not a lot of time, so can I ask members to be brief with the kind of
question so that we can get a brief answer? Thank you.
Carl first.
Thanks, Chair. In section 8, you talk about the
cashing up.
Yes.
And saying that's a good thing. And then in section 10, you talk
about the need for genuine rest and recreation.
Yes.
And those two concepts just challenge each other.
They conflict each other.
So I was interested in your thought.
Yes. I think from an employee engagement perspective,
we're happy to obviously allow for...
We don't promote it within aviation to cash up your annual leave.
We're more saying we support the cashing-up request if it remains
autonomous in terms of you can select what you cash up, and there's mutual
agreement in that space. But we do, our position is to promote people to
take annual leave and use it for rest and recreation.
That's why one of our main oppositions was only being able to
take obviously one period of 14-day leave outside
of mutual agreement within the anniversary period.
So yeah, we do obviously support completely people
taking leave.
Thanks.
Yeah.
Parmjeet Parmar.
Yeah, thank you. So about the part-day leave-
Yes
... you have expressed your concerns about that.
So what happens in a situation when somebody's on a shift and falls sick?
So in that situation, the person-
Yeah
... will have to go, and so you already might be managing that, isn't it, in a way?
Yeah. So it is a current obviously reality that we face, and that's why sometimes
we have flight cancellations and things like that, or well, it happens all the
time. So if someone is obviously sick or fatigued, they would have to remove
themselves from their shift, and then they have to either call in someone from
standby or callback sort of component, or there's someone ready to go.
In that instance, obviously, that is a part-day mechanism that
would potentially come into place, but obviously, it's an actual
full day worth of leave taken dependent on the collective agreement.
So there are some benefits, I do acknowledge in that sense.
But in terms of the application, calling up in the morning, "I've got to take my
child to an appointment. Can I have a half day?" It's a full
shift realized if that-
Yeah
... answers that question. Yeah.
Thank you. And then a final question from Shannon Halbert.
Thanks so much. And hey,
the sector's done a lot of work around the fatigue management
framework-
Mm-hmm
... over a few years. And in hearing your summary
today, that this really is counter
to what the sector's been trying to achieve in that space.
Is that your understanding, and if so, why?
I think in terms of the accrual rates, like if we're looking at sick leave
and rostering constraints in itself, in terms of the fatigue management
perspective piece, I would say the sick leave proration would be
our main concern in terms of fatigue management.
And that's purely because obviously, if you're reducing someone's leave
entitlements, they're more likely to go to work feeling unwell.
Mm.
And given that aviation professionals quite often get unwell, given
the sector that they work in and the hours that they work, and the fatigue they
do face every day, reducing their entitlement,
while we don't have the statistics, but I could imagine that it would increase
sick leave through the roof and risk to the public sector, given people might
choose to operate in an unsafe environment.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
Really appreciate your submission, being part of the process.
Thank you.
Nice to have someone in person sometimes.
I know. Thank you.
Awesome. All right. We move on now to Horticulture New Zealand.
Sarah Cameron and Dean Smith, welcome.You're online.
We have 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions, and I'll leave
you to manage that. And it's over to you now.
So good morning, everybody. There are two issues of
concern for us noted in our submission, which is the LCP
payment and the otherwise working day test.
And we mirror Mike Chapman's comments around the
LCP payment.
So fully aware we've only got a short time for questions, so I'll just quickly hand
over to Dean, who will have some
comments to make on both of those.
Kia ora, everyone. Thanks, Sarah.
Look, I suppose from a Summerfruit NZ perspective, we obviously represent
growers of cherries, peaches, plums, apricots, nectarines in New Zealand.
Our primary concern is especially for the cherry industry, and I think we need to
consider the dynamics of that industry.
So,
it's an industry which has a very compressed season, so starts around
December,
finishes in early February. So it's normally around a five- to six-week sprint.
So it's an industry that relies very, very heavily on casual labor,
and
I guess the context around that is the material impact that the proposed
changes would have on the profitability of that industry by
baking in sick leave entitlements into the LCP.
So for context, around 40% of total operating expenditure
for an average cherry orchard is casual
labor. So, by baking in an additional 4.5% sick leave
on 40% of your
opex, that's effectively a 2% increase in total expense.
And when you're operating with gross margins in the vicinity of
10% in an average year,
this year won't be anything like that.
Obviously, effectively that's
2% of your profit gone by baking this in.
And I think the other thing, we acknowledge the importance of sick
leave, but I guess by baking it in from day one and
making it effectively an additional fixed cost, that's a major
concern.
I guess the other aspect of this is around the otherwise
working day aspect.
The cherry industry is also unique in that it has an unavoidable
timeframe, which coincides with a significant number of public
holidays. So effectively, you're looking at around
8% to 9% of working days are public holidays, which are obviously
unavoidable.
And we don't feel that that's equitable.
It's not currently, and the bill doesn't resolve it.
In the submission, you'll see that we believe a more equitable approach
would be to deal with that by
adding an additional margin on top of
the casual wage. Sarah, you might want to
elaborate on what's proposed.
Yeah. So we're proposing a 4% across the
board payment. And I do have a point of clarification around that.
In the submission that was consulted on throughout the industry, that
4% is for an eight-week period. So for casual workers that are
employed less than eight weeks, that 4% would apply to
account for those
condensed public holidays over the Christmas period for the cherry industry,
not for casual workers, no matter how long they are employed.
So we've based the calculation on the
number of public holidays there are per year versus the 260
working days, which is noted in the Cabinet paper.
And I guess, yeah, we invite questions now.
Wonderful. Thank you. I do have a question myself.
I understand the difference
with the casual nature, or the
seasonal nature of your casual employment.
When it comes to your perspective, I
suppose, on the changes,
I just want to understand, I think, what sort of
preparation there is for any change that
ever could happen. Any change in this particular case, and
I really understand everything that you're coming through with.
In terms of the 2% increase,
we've seen RSE changes over time, how the sector's
dealt with that and cost implications and sort of the preparation for
things like this that might happen.
Yeah, look, I guess we appreciate that inflation happens, and that you have
to have a business model that can absorb inflation.
I guess this just comes on top of everything else, and the materiality of it for
this part of the industry is probably the thing that's the most alarming.
As I say,
we have a disproportional reliance on casual labor, and it's
unavoidable, and the casual people that we are calling on
are probably perhaps not the people that were perceived to be
who the changes were
to consider, in that we are talking about backpackers, we're talking
about students.
These are the people that we rely on to harvest cherries at this peak time.
And so for context, you might have
an operator that might have four or five permanent staff, but their
workforce might swell to 50 or 60 backpackers and students
that they rely on at that time.
So we can't get away from the impact of it,
and I guess it's the materiality of the impact on profitability which
we are really wanting to highlight, I suppose.
If I said to you that,
for instance, if your gross margin's 10% and 2%'s taken away, that's a
20% reduction in your profit.
If your boss rocked up to you and said, "Hey, by the way, your salary's going to
increase by 20%," I don't think you'd consider that immaterial.
Yeah. And thank you. That's-
And if I could just-- Sorry. If I could-
Yeah, no, go
... yeah, a comment around, you raised the RSE scheme, and we are
in a situation now with that scheme where it has
become-Probably not economically viable
for employers to continue using it, and we're seeing big drop-offs
in the numbers of employers utilizing the scheme because of the
financial burden attached to it around the pastoral care.
So,
employers are really facing it out there, and they're having to
make choices
which impact their bottom line.
Thank you. That's incredibly helpful context to especially the earlier part of the
question.
It doesn't appear that we have any further questions, but can I please say that
it's not a lack of interest. You have put forward a very, very helpful
and comprehensive submission, and I know our officials will really appreciate it.
Awesome.
So thank you for that.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thanks for the opportunity.
Thank you for being part of the process. Yeah, thank you very much.
All right, bye.
Bye.
All right. We have Access Community Health Limited, and
we are running a little early now, so my hope is that they are
available. Wonderful. We have got Warwick Jackson
joining us
online.
Good morning.
Good morning, Warwick. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes
time for questions, so we'll leave you to manage that, and hand over to you
now.
Yeah. Tena koe chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to represent Access Community Health regarding the
Employment Leave Bill. I intend to only speak for five minutes and leave time for
questions.
My name is Warwick Jackson. I am the Executive Director, Strategy and Finance
for Access.
Access Community Health is a New Zealand-based home and community
organization. We help tens of thousands of people every week live their
lives at home every day. To do this, we have
3,500 amazing staff. This includes nurses,
people who work in the office, but also 3,000 support workers.
So support workers are quite a unique
group. They mostly work part-time, maybe 20 to 30
hours a week on average. Their work often changes because the people we
support have changing needs. They move in and out of our service.
So rosters change weekly, week on week, daily.
Hours change, frequency changes.
It's very
difficult to manage. With all that complexity and volume, all the
edge cases
come up commonly for our sort of business.
So any sort of scenario that you think, "Oh, that might be a bit unlikely," we
probably get it. So that's why this bill is so important to
us.
So firstly, I say we support the bill, and it's moved from a weeks-based
system to an hours accrual system.
However, I want to focus on one particular part of our
submission that the bill, as written, has the
potential to create a perverse incentive for
employees to at times not take their sick
leave and to not agree to standard hours.
A sick health worker should not be working, as they put the health of
themselves and the vulnerable people we care for at risk.
The most important change we are looking for is to either
remove the LCP payment system altogether for non-casual staff
or allow it to be optional so leave can be accrued
on all hours worked.
As an example to illustrate this, a support worker often
begins with very few hours, maybe five a week, and they build up their hours
if they want to. And let's say they build up those hours to 40 hours
per week. So in the extreme, that person has got five
standard hours and 35 additional hours.
So that's 35 hours that they're getting paid LCP for, the
12.5%. When the employer proposes
converting those hours from additional hours to standard hours to better
affect the worker's ongoing schedule, the employee faces a
rational economic choice to refuse this.
Converting would mean losing the immediate LCP payment
because they're getting more. They're getting it in their pocket.
They don't have to wait for it. Yes, they're exchanging it for not
accruing leave, but in terms of
that choice for that week, you're effectively decreasing your pay.
So where the worker is encouraged to not accept standard hours and the employer
has a need for hours, this puts the employer in a precarious
position. And then when that worker is sick, they are
faced with some unintended choices.
They may take sick leave and get paid sick leave for the standard and
additional hours in their roster.
So in that example, they had one standard hour for the day and seven
additional hours, so they'll get paid their eight hours plus LCP, so
they actually get paid more for seven of those hours.
But with working just five standard hours a week, they're only accruing 10 hours
sick leave a year. So on that day, they're using eight out of their 10
hours. That's
80% for one day sick leave. So they're left with a difficult choice
about whether to take leave or not.
Mm.
In another scenario, maybe the sick leave is planned.
Maybe they have an operation coming up,
and at the time of booking, their roster might not be full, so they might just have
the one standard hour in there. This is common for us.
They are now incentivized to not tell their employer that they're going to have
an operation, to wait until their roster is filled up, and maybe even to
ask for more work
because an LCP payment is higher than a standard out sick leave
payment, thus putting the care of others at risk.
Now, we expect our support workers to not do this, of course, but we would
also expect a law to not incentivize people to do
it.
These scenarios would be solved very simply if leave could be accrued on
all hours worked.
The worker would have sick leave to use and would
not need to consider the current state of their roster before booking
sick leave.
We then move on to determining how many hours they're going to get paid, which is
an important part of the same issue.Given how
frequently work changes, hours and days, the employment
agreement roster and notional roster are all not very
practical frameworks for us. A notional roster, when somebody's hours are changing
every week, would have to be agreed every week.
That's just completely impractical.
So we would like to be able to choose to use the 13-week
average to determine a notional roster to be used for leave.
Legislation already allows this method to be used by the labor inspector, and
as such, we would like to be able to choose to use that as a
method. So, for example, if the support worker works on average
five hours a week on a Tuesday and they're sick, they can be paid five hours.
Thank you. Any questions?
Thank you, Warwick. That's an incredibly helpful contextual submission.
We have one question from Kamjit Tamar.
A very quick one, Warwick. Thank you so much.
So,
you don't like leave compensation payment, and you have explained
the reasons about how employees can have
their views towards employment agreements and towards shift
work. But is there anything else in the system that
will create any complexity for you in terms
of
basically calculating the pay, tracking it, payroll systems?
Do you see any complexity there?
Yes. So wherever there's a switch or an if in the
legislation, that creates complexity for us.
So, for example, if there's
going from your agreement hours to your roster hours to your
notional hours, building all that sort of thing into a system is expensive and
complicated, and that's one of the reasons we'd like to just be able to choose the
13-week average.
The
switch from standard hours to additional hours, that creates complexity.
Again, something that needs a rule, that needs tracking, that needs
updated agreements, that needs the employee to agree to it.
That's extremely cumbersome when you have a large workforce
whose hours change regularly. Does that answer your
question?
Yeah, no, thanks for that. But that would happen in any employment situation
anyway, isn't it?
Oh.
Because actual hours worked might vary from
what's in the contract.
Was the question, is that happening now, and how do we deal with it now?
Yeah. Like now, also.
Yes. So right now in the legislation, there's a concept of definition of a week.
The current legislation doesn't define what a definition of a week is, so we
actually have in our agreements, or some of the people in our industry have in
their agreements, that the definition of a week is a rolling average.
So we actually use this technique now already.
Okay. So you're not using the actual hours worked every week
for your company?
We use an average of the hours every week because they change
every week. So if somebody's going to be sick or going to book off sick leave, you
don't know how many hours they're going to work, so you cannot rely on the hours
they work that week because they're not working because they're sick, and they
change so frequently.
Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Again, want to say thank you, Warwick, for your very
helpful context. It's always good for us to get industry specific
insight, so appreciate that. We'll move on now to our next submitter.
So thank you for your contribution.
Thank you.
We now have Workers First Union. We have Sabrina Sachs joining us
online.
Kia ora. I also should have Nick Main with me.
Do you want to see-
That's no problem. We're not in a rush, Sabrina.
We've just caught up on time a little bit, so that's okay.
We'll give him an-
I think he's in. I just think he hasn't been promoted to a panelist.
Ah, thank you. We'll work that out behind.
He is in. Brilliant. I think that's worked out now.
Wonderful. All right. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
There we go.
Thank you for being agile, as we run a little bit ahead of schedule.
In that 10 minutes, we've got time for questions, so we'll leave you to
manage that and hand over to you now.
Thank you.
Well, kia ora, everybody. My name's Nicholas Main.
I'm a organizer with Workers First Union, working
in the retail and finance sector in North Auckland,
and you've already had a quick chat to my colleague, Sabrina, who is
one of our legal organizers, primarily working in the area of
transport and logistics.
So between us, we've got quite a bit of experience in terms of
real-world applications of how the Employment Leave Bill and the
Holidays Act...
Well, the Employment Leave Bill could impact workers, and how the Holidays Act is
currently working
across a variety of industries. And we would
submit that the Holidays Act is actually working quite well.
We disagree with the idea that the current
law needs wholesale change.
We acknowledge that there are people who want it tossed out and
something different put in.
In our experience, the areas where people struggle with the Holidays Act
generally are situations where people are
trying to find loopholes that disadvantage workers
rather than actually trying to fulfill the purposes of the Holidays Act.
And as I was reflecting on this last night, I came to think of the bill, and I was
thinking about Charles Dickens' "A Christmas Carol,"
and the character Ebenezer Scrooge.
And of course, the whole moral of that story was that Ebenezer Scrooge
didn't really appreciate the significance of a holiday
because he was so focused on making money.
And that's precisely what we see the spirit that this bill
is embodying. It is entirely about taking what is
quality time with family outside of work and commodifying it
into something about money.
And for me, that starts right at the beginning of the bill.
When we read the purpose statements
under the Holidays Act, the purpose statement for annual leave is
rest and recreation.
This bill changes the purpose statement from rest and recreation
to paid time off work.
Now, that seems like a subtle and inconsequential change, but it actually
has a huge significance for how this bill is interpreted and
applied.
One of the biggest issues I come across in retail with respect to
annual leave is workers trying to get time off work when it is
significant for them to spend time with friends and family doing the things that
are meaningful.
Maybe it's that they're a parent and they want to spend time off during the school
holidays with their kids.
Maybe it's that they're a young person who's competing in
a sports tournament and they need time off to do that.
Maybe it's just that they need to book tickets when they can
actually afford to do it, to do some international trip.
These times are not always convenient for employers, and the current law
requires that the employer take into account the purpose for
annual leave as rest and recreation, and factor that in,
in terms of whether they can reasonably approve the leave or not.
Changing the purpose statement to paid time off work
removes that test. Suddenly, the employer does not
need to consider how one day is different from any other day.
It's all just paid time off work,
and that is horrible. That is commodifying
what it comes down to quality time off
work into an accounting ledger balance.
It is dehumanizing the purpose of leave.
So for that, we say humbug.
But I will pass over to Sabrina now to talk about a few more of the other
aspects of the act or the bill, sorry.
Thanks, Nick.
Yeah, just to, I guess, follow on from what Nick is saying.
We disagree that the Holidays Act needs replacing,
and we disagree that the bill is simpler.
The Holidays Act has been in place for over 20 years.
Yes, there's been some issues with compliance, but those issues have
now been worked through. People understand how to implement the Holidays
Act,
both employees and employers alike.
Payroll systems are in place to reflect how the act works, and there's a wealth of
case law actually underpinning it to aid interpretation.
Effectively, what this bill will do is completely overturn all of that,
take us back to where we were 20 years ago with that lack of clarity, a
lot of ambiguity,
lots of litigation. So our view is that the bill is not
simpler,
but it is worse for workers. And in all
times, you can see throughout the bill that choices have been made to reduce
entitlements. That's not for simplicity, that's for reducing
entitlements, and I think we need to be clear what the clear purpose of the bill
is. Now, I'll give you a
few examples of some of the issues that we've identified.
One of these is sick leave.
In our submissions, we gave an example of an ambulance officer and how it could
impact them when they work for 12-hour shifts.
But I also want to give another example, which is a warehouse worker.
So we have some warehouse workers who work for 10-hour shifts in a week, so
they're still working 40 hours per week.
Now, if they
accrue sick leave under this bill, they would only accrue 80 hours per year,
which is ostensibly if you're working 8-hour shifts, that's 10 days of
sick leave. If you're working 10-hour shifts, you only actually get 8 days
of sick leave.
So that actually significantly reduces the amount of leave that
a warehouse worker gets. They're still working 40 hours per week, they're still
full-time, and yet they've lost two days of sick leave as opposed to someone else
who is working a five-day, 8-hour week.
So,
this is hard work that they're doing. It's back-breaking work.
It's work that requires rest and recreation.
It's work that requires sick leave, right?
It's pretty hard for you to come into work when you're doing back-breaking work,
physical labor. Coming in sick is going to have
implications on your health, your coworker's health, and everything else.
So the bill effectively incentivizes these people to come
into work while sick,
and
that brings us to the LCP as well. Now, as Nick has
addressed, it incentivizes-- it turns leave into a
monetary thing, not actually time with family.
But even when it comes to sick leave, you can't replace sick leave with money.
If someone's sick, they need to be sick, and replacing
that with money is not going to help them take the time off work.
And we're turning sick leave into an hourly thing.
People don't take sick leave in hours, typically.
Sometimes they may, but more often than not, if you're sick, you're sick for the
whole day, so it doesn't make sense to turn it into an hourly thing.
In terms of close-downs, we're quite concerned that the bill has removed the
reference to customary, that close-downs must be customary.
There's no cap to the length of a close-down in the bill.
Now, it might be that this may have to be established through litigation, because
currently if an employer comes through with a particularly ridiculously long
close-down, we can argue that it's not customary, for example.
But the current bill doesn't have that.
So if an employer decides to do a very lengthy close-down, what's there
to stop them from doing it? What's there to stop them from having a close-down
that's actually longer than four weeks, longer than the amount of leave an employee
could ever possibly have?
It might be that the courts may interpret that in a certain way, but
that's going to result in litigation to have to resolve that issue.
Finally, in terms of public holidays, obviously there's
significant changes to public holidays. We note an example.
If someone is employed to work every Tuesday, by
way of example, in their employment agreement, but they work every Monday and they
have worked every Monday the last 13 weeks, they still wouldn't get a public
holiday for that Monday.
Now, that can't be
The purpose of a humane and
employee and fairness-driven piece of legislation.
I'll pass back to Nick now to finish up with a few comments.
Yeah. So the next topic that I've been asked to talk
about is casual employees.
The bill takes away all leave entitlements for casual
employees, and
from a simplicity point, this makes sense until you realize, as we
experience a variety of different working environments
in the retail sector,
where we currently have problems is not where someone's a genuine
casual.
Where we have problems is where employers are trying to
cheat the system,
to try and avoid Holiday Act entitlements by calling someone a
casual. And within the current Holidays Act, we can use
the tools in there to get people
leave entitlements where employers are trying to avoid
giving workers time off when they're sick or time off to do things that are
meaningful in their life. And I've done this on regular occasions.
Loss of pay, actually, this is a big one, and it's going to annoy a lot of
workers.
We say that this is all about turning things into money, this bill,
but it's all about turning things into money that are to the advantage of the
employer, not about ensuring that workers are not
disadvantaged when they take time off work.
The current Holidays Act means that workers will always be paid at
least what they would normally get in that week or on that day when they take
leave.
This bill will mean that they are paid at the lowest clickable
hourly rate.
And I was with some Woolworths workers last night, who work nightfill,
and they were disgusted at the idea that they would miss out
on their shift allowance under this bill, because for the
first hour or two, they don't get their shift allowance, and then
thereafter that they get it for the rest of their shift.
So that's like $50 less a week if they take a week's annual
leave. And it may not seem much, but for these guys it's a lot
because they're already on low wages.
This is going to get a lot of workers' backs up.
And retail workers don't have a huge amount of allowances.
In areas that other unions represent where there are significantly
more allowances, you're going to get a lot more cost to workers than that.
Unfortunately, Nicholas, I'm just going to need to leave your submission there.
We've reached the end of our time with you.
Okay.
So do appreciate your participation in the process.
Thank you both for making the time to join our select committee this morning.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Okay, we move on to APEX and NZRDA
unions who have been able to join us.
Thank you very much for being here early and being able to join us
in our agenda. We've got Jo Ingham and Sarah Barker.
Ten minutes with you this morning, that includes time for questions, and we'll hand
it over to you now.
Kia ora.
Kia ora koutou.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to provide
this oral submission on the Employment Leave Bill.
We represent APEX and
NZRDA members. APEX is the specialist union for
allied scientific and technical professionals across the public and private
sector.
And we have about 5,500 members in that space.
And the NZRDA
represents 3,000 resident doctors,
also known as resident medical officers.
And as we
put in our submission, we oppose most aspects of
the bill.
In our view, despite its claims, it is not simpler
than the current Act and will not reduce complexity or
non-compliance.
Our view is that issues can be addressed within the current framework,
and by improving payroll systems to make them fit for purpose.
And also, in many instances, it will reduce employees'
entitlements, including for part-time workers,
disproportionately women, disabled people, and other minorities,
and also those on ACC and unpaid leave.
These groups will receive less leave under the proposed bill.
It will also mean for employees who work additional hours or
receive additional payments,
they will be disadvantaged when they take leave.
Many of our APEX members do receive allowances
on call. They work on call, they do dual roles,
and so when they take leave, they will receive significantly less under the
proposed bill.
Yep.
Kia ora koutou. I'm Sarah Barker. I work for APEX,
that's a healthcare workers' union.
And many of our workers have a whole lot of
what is described as variable
working patterns. So that includes, as Jo has said,
part-time, on-call, casual, dual roles,
all sorts of arrangements. I think to begin with,
our view is, is that the current Holidays Act is underpinned by two
super important principles. One is, is that all employees,
so it only uses the word in the Act, employees, all
employees have entitlements to a bunch of leave,
sick leave, bereavement leave, lieu days, and annual leave.
And the other super important principle is, is that
when you take that leave, you will not be disadvantaged in pay
by taking the leave.
We feel really strongly that the narrative that
the Act is broken or too complicated,
it's not a
validAssessment of the
Act and that what underpins its problems, as
it were, is really clearly the payroll and
other systems. And that has been
the
example, I guess, because Joe and I have been involved in the Holidays Act
remediation process for Health New Zealand literally for years.
And so, just a little example of
why can't we have systems, payroll software,
that can do
what you might consider as complicated calculations.
For example, what emerged very early on the piece in the Holidays
Act remediation,
Auckland City Hospital, when it was calculating
people's bereavement, BAPS leave we call it,
eh? They could only do one calculation in their system
and that was for relevant daily pay.
Across town at Waitemata, they had a system that could only
calculate average daily pay. Our question should be, why
can't you have a system that can do both? Because that is what's required.
So we feel really strongly that
the principles that all employees have entitlements to leave
and that all of that leave
should be able to be taken without being disadvantaged in
pay are the underpinnings of the current
act, and that those principles should be
held onto. Those principles are utterly
abandoned in the Employment Leave Bill.
As our
previous union colleagues have outlined some excellent
examples
where employers are able to exploit
people's need for work clearly, and
their ability to be flexible, they will
effectively be worse off in terms of actual time and
actual pay. That's frankly appalling.
The other thing about workers' flexibility, and this is another
important
thing that we'd like to submit, is that employment
arrangements,
employers increasingly demand flexibility from their
workforce.
This flexibility makes it really hard for
people to
organize their life outside of work.
It makes it very difficult to have regular commitments.
So why should workers who are willing
to provide that flexibility literally be penalized
by having less leave
and
being disadvantaged in pay by taking the leave?
We
looked at the proposal around notional roster.
It's all sorts of complicated and
impossible to administer, and so we're
seriously questioning the claim that the
bill is
going to reduce complexities. Notional roster seems to be
all kinds of crazy
and impossible to either
understand and
we
note one of the CTU submissions ...
The CTU submission talked about
good faith, the underpinnings of good faith in the current act.
A notional roster seems to be the employer and the worker
agree on what a notional roster looks like.
So why do we need to change the idea
that an employer and an employee can agree on, for example, what
genuinely constitutes a week or what days might be available to
take leave?
Notional roster also weirdly
has references to
the thing that is called standard hours.
Standard hours appears to be simply the guaranteed hours
that
got put on your letter of offer when you started a job,
and so we think it probably resembles,
what is it? Section 67C of the act,
which uses the words guaranteed minimum hours.
And then strangely,
the notional roster section of the act refers to
discussing with your employer what constitutes standard hours.
We don't get that. It's clunky.
Notional roster,
in our view, is unworkable and our submission has
pointed out other defects. For example, at some point,
what happens when the notional roster no longer resembles the
actual
working roster?
Do you want to add anything? We've only got
a few minutes left, so if there's any questions, we're happy to answer
those.
We do in fact have a question already from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks for your presentation.
Most New Zealanders understand that the more it costs to do
things, the more it costs at the supermarket, for
everything that people buy on a day-to-day basis, and most New
Zealanders understand the concept of fairness.
Can you explain to me why you're so against the idea that if
someone's on ACC for a year, they should be able to come back to
work and then have four weeks, if that's
their allowance in their contract, annual leave
automatically?
Because they're still an employee.
They're still an employee of a particular employer.
After being off work for a
yearWith that employer having to have
covered that job and give someone else who was actually doing the job for
that year,
those annual leave and other entitlements
That's our response, because they're still actually an employee,
and those entitlements under the current regime, as you say,
these things depending
on, is the person on earnings related compensation?
Because if they are, then we're going to presume that the annual leave has
an actual monetary amount that will be less than what they
would have accrued had they been working.
If they're not on
earnings related compensation, if
because they're recovering,
I'd like to emphasize they're still actually an employee.
Can we actually treat them as if they're still an employee?
When they return to employment, they might have
leave that got accrued, but it will be worth nothing.
So I'm not understanding what the problem is with
ensuring that people on ACC, again, because they're still
employees of work-
They may well be employees, but they are not working during that period.
Is there anything that you accept in the
current Holidays Act, and the changes being proposed,
will support or are you supportive of any of the steps being taken
here, to reduce the cost of production and improve
productivity in New Zealand, i.e. reduce inflation?
Or are all of your suggestions things that just drive up inflation, drive
up the cost of food, because you're not willing to take a practical
understanding of the reality of how things get done in New Zealand?
Sorry, I don't
quite get the link between somebody's leave entitlements and
inflation.
More like the ACC-
I'm not understanding that, sorry. The inflation for who?
That's okay. Look, unfortunately we've reached the end of our time.
But thank you very much for your submission. Very constructive.
Thank you. We'll move on now
to see if we got... We haven't got anyone. Okay, that's okay.
We'll move on to a short break,
as our 9:00, our 9:05 has not yet joined.
In short?
Well, like a minute.
We will basically wait until Tertiary Education unit join
us. If we could just pause the recording.
Oh.
Can we pause the recording? Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you.
Oh.
You never hear that.
Very similar.
Yeah.
But let's see.
Could we sit down for a
minute?We're
starting with NZCTU.
Righto.
E tū.
NZCTU. We've not got, we do not have E
Tū.
NZ-
No, sorry, we do not have TEU.
So we're just skipping past TEU going straight to-
Well, we'll just lump them all together
... CTU.
They're all just unions, put them all together.
They are, that's correct. That's a fair observation. Right. Come on.
Team, we're back online, we're good to go.
And we're just waiting for
Sandra Gray and John Crocker.
Oh, here she is.
Thank you, Sandra. Welcome.
Morning.
Good morning.
The star.
And here's John. Wonderful.
Welcome. Thank you very much for joining us.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions.
It's over to you how you manage that, and it is all yours now.
Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to join you on this
important issue. We'll go straight into it, given the short
time frames, about how the union movement as a whole
feels about this particular bill.
We've been out.
We do want to open by just saying that we
do not think this bill is workable, not just for workers, it isn't
workable for employers. It's going to cause problems in the
payroll space, and overall, we think that it is
poorly drafted and not going to achieve the
outcomes that were intended.
We want to say that instead of reducing complexity and
cost,
sorry, and cost to employers, it is actually
going to increase those things. And we
do fear that this will lead to significant and
increased litigation around people's rights to
leave, both holidays, sick leave, and other forms of
leave.
We do also want to note that this bill is going to
disentitle large numbers of workers,
in terms of their entitlements around leave,
and that is not something that the union
movement can sit by and watch.
Some groups of workers are going to be affected disproportionately,
and that is people who are in part-time work, those who have variable
hours, and those who work two or more jobs.
And John will go into a little detail as to why those workers
are affected. But we do want to point out to the select committee
that those jobs are held predominantly by young people, by
Māori, by Pasifika, and migrant workers, and by
women, because they crowd out the space of non-standard
employment arrangements. So they will be significantly and
disproportionately affected by the negative impact
of this bill.
I do also want to say, you all appreciate this because you have very
busy schedules, we do need to make sure people have time for
rest and recreation, and that we acknowledge as a country
that is important.
So John is going to just elaborate a little bit on why we
see this bill as taking away both time from workers
and pay, both of which
are harmful. And it is important to note that all of
the work done in the lead-up to this bill said we should not advance
changes that will harm workers, but
this bill will. So John.
Yeah, Sandra.
First, I'd like to start talking about the purpose of this bill and how it moves
away from the Holidays Act. So for annual leave, the Holidays Act said it was for
rest and recreation. This new bill says it will be for paid time off.
Those are quite different concepts.
Rest and recreation is what people need for their lives, for their health, for
society.
Paid time off is very transactional.
It doesn't mention when,
it doesn't mention that it's continuous, it's just paid time off.
This is significant sitting in the purpose, as it will affect the inevitable
litigation that will come out of this.
Secondly,
paid time off, it doesn't even achieve its own stated
purpose. By using a leave compensation payment, it's
actually not providing for paid time off for a
lot of workers in a lot of situations.
It will instead give them money rather than paid time off, rather than rest and
recreation. So we see this stepping a long way from the Holidays Act
that we're all used to.
It's not simple and clear. It's considerably longer.
It's poorly written. There are more calculations involved.
This is not going to be easy to implement.
So looking at some of the mechanisms,
when we look at annual leave, for people who have low
guaranteed hours versus the number of hours they work, which can be common,
hospitality, retail, other sectors, they will not get
much annual leave at allAnd this is
mirrored in sick leave,
which is frankly a little bit dangerous.
We need people to have access to paid sick leave, so when they are
feeling unwell, perhaps they can make a
choice that if they take time off, that they will receive
the normal amount of pay and not risk themselves,
their colleagues, or customers by going into work unwell,
or if they're injured, re-injuring themselves.
And these costs will fall back onto society, the cost will be
socialized.
So the other one is alternative leave,
where our current system has alternative days.
That is when a worker works on a public holiday, they get a whole day off.
They will now get
leave time. It is just going to be a few hours, but the whole
point of an alternative day is because that entire
day has been lost, it could be cultural, religious, socially
significant to them. They lose the whole day, and if they're only working a few
hours, if they just need to pop in, they only get a little bit of leave and
compensation. They're going to be moving to less pay when people are
on leave. The bill
says that employers should look for the lowest rate people get for the day.
So if they get overtime, if they get penal rates, unless that's for the
entire shift, they won't be getting those.
And commission is particularly harsh. Commission isn't counted at all.
So if you're predominantly a commission-based worker, you will shift to the minimum
wage when you take leave.
These mechanisms are pointing towards increased casualization,
which increases precarity. It has all kinds of negative social effects from people
not being able to access credit, to not being able to enter into
tenancy agreements.
The transitional provisions are very complicated.
The Holidays Act was written at the time so that hopefully people could do it on a
pen and paper, the small employers.
The transitional provisions are very complicated. It's moving away from that.
It's going to disadvantage small employers who don't have that expert resource.
The remediation,
there are several parts of that, that give us concerns that people's
access to justice under the Bill of Rights Act will be impacted by the
proposed remediation. So this will be worse for workers, it'll be worse
for employers, it will lead to litigation, it will be good for nobody.
Sandra's mentioned the equity issues.
The Holidays Act is about taking time off.
It's not about trying to automate something.
This bill should not proceed, and we have left some time for
questions. Thank you.
Thank you. I have a question to start. Thanks, John.
Look, I think we've heard quite a bit of this focus on the definition of
rest and recreation versus paid time off.
Do you not think that it's the employee's right to do with that time what
they will?
It's not so much about what they do with the time.
The purpose comes into the authorities' or courts'
interpretation. So when a worker
and an employer can't agree on the time they take off,
or when
it suits the business, when it suits the worker, it effectively, after engagement,
defaults to the employer to specify that.
Now, they could specify, "I want you to take off two hours every morning,"
and that's going to knock out one day's leave, whereas the worker would rather have
a three-day weekend. And so having that paid time off,
can they do rest and recreation two hours each morning, or would they rather have a
full day to get something done? And that's the difference there, is that when
we take away the purpose of rest and recreation, and there's no agreement between
the employer and employee, we can have a situation where what is proposed to the
employee and decided for them is very inconvenient, and they frankly can't
necessarily rest or recreate in that period.
They could do it in the middle of the day and force people into split shifts just
because it gets quiet in the afternoon.
We'll take two hours paid leave, and now I'm burning through your leave balance
because that's what's convenient to me.
So that's an extreme example, but that's what the
purpose will shift when it comes to interpretation by the courts and the authority.
Okay. And then the other question I had was you talked
about commission, and the fact that when someone was on
leave they then wouldn't be entitled to payment of commission.
But are they, at that time, earning
the amount of
revenue for a business that is then commissioned, or is
someone else doing that-
What I'd suggest is-
... while that person's away?
What I'm thinking about is, well, someone else could be earning that commission.
But if someone works largely on a commission, say someone works in sales, let's say
they're on good money, I think we put an example in our submission.
Their income can be primarily commission-based because they
sell plenty, and they are on a good commission rate.
When they go on leave, the commission isn't counted, and if there
isn't another rate built into the employment agreement, they will fall back to the
minimum wage when they take leave from an otherwise
possibly quite well-remunerated job.
Yes, but sorry, can I just clarify that when they sign up for that
role, they know they are signing up to earn commission while they were
working because of what they are generating in work, right?
So then they know that when they're not working, they're not generating the
commission, that someone else that's filling their space while they're
away is in fact doing that.
Yes, but if someone entered the role currently, they would be
taking leave and getting average
weekly pay or ordinary weekly earnings.
So when they take leave, they get an average of what they earn during the year,
which is under the current act. Under the proposal, a commission-based worker would
drop to the minimum wage.
Okay.
Well, thank you very much. Doesn't appear we have any other questions, so we'll
move on now to our next submitter.
Thank you for joining us-
Thank you
... and for being part of our process.
Okay. We now have Ear2.
Welcome, Rachel McIntosh and Tamara Baddeley
I'll show
people.
Welcome.
Oh, kia ora. Kia ora koutou. Kia ora tatou.
Thank you to the select committee for giving
us this time to present on our
submission. I would first like to start
by saying that we endorse everything in the previous
submission, the CTU's submission.
And,
from our point of view, we would like to
make the committee aware of the effect of this law on actual
workers. We were to have two workers, but
Mark Anderson, who is a miner, has
got a family matter and is unable to join us.
And that
really for us, the focus that we would ask you to consider
is that
what we exist for as a union is for people to have
decent lives and decent work, and rest and recreation.
And so
we would like you to hear from a worker who will be
affected if this law passes. So I would like to hand over to
Tamara now.
Thank you, Rachel. Good morning, everybody, and thank you for giving me the
opportunity
to speak with you.
I am a home support worker.
I currently have minimal
hours,
and they keep reviewing and changing
weekly.
As a result of that, my leave balance keeps changing weekly.
The amount of leave I can accrue on a weekly, monthly
basis keeps changing.
If you want to change it to the minimum hours worked
per day or per week,
I could be down as low as five hours.
Which is not even a whole day.
Keeping leave at the moment as it is, as day for day,
means that
if I do need to do something, I can take the whole day and
get reimbursed enough to actually cover my costs.
As for going to leave hours, well,
that's not going to work for so many of us.
When you talk about reducing sick leave to what we
actually work. Because I work in care and support,
looking after the most vulnerable, all I need to do is take a
flu bug to someone and, you know, that will
put three or four people off or possibly kill the older people because of their-
Chance
... weakened immune systems.
As for my colleagues working in rest homes, they can't afford to go to work
sick. But if they have the changes, they can't afford to
take the sick leave.
It's there so that we do not take it to other people.
With our job, we can pick things up from everywhere.
Being responsible people, we would not go to work infected.
If we've got reduced sick leave, we're going to have to go to work sick, and that
will affect everybody. As for
reducing your leave to the bare minimum hours you
work,
when you regularly do overtime, it
gives you an opportunity to actually have some savings.
To be able to plan for a holiday or some
sort of break with your family or whoever.
If it is restricted to the
actual number of hours you've agreed to, you will never have that
opportunity.
One of the
people who submitted in our submission, who works in a rest home,
uses his
overtime to save to be able to go home to India to see
his family. If you were to take that away from him, he'll never
get to go and see his family. We work hard.
We deserve the leave and the sick leave allowances that we
currently have.
Over to you, Rachel.
Thanks, Tamara.
So for E Tū, we represent 48,000
workers, and many of them work variable hours.
Tamara, I think, has given a very clear indication of the
actual effect on a working person of these changes
if they happen.
And Tamara is in an undervalued,
underpaid sector. Mark, if he were here, he is not in an
underpaid and undervalued sector.
But
because of the nature of his work and the changing hours that he
works,
this would affect him as well. So this will affect
thousands upon thousands of New Zealand workers in a negative
way.
If we want a country that is prosperous, where people are
doing well, we should not be passing legislation that will
reduce people's ability to take leave, to have decent
lives, to have a decent income. And that is what
this bill would do if it were passed.
So kia ora tatou.
I've got a question.
Kia ora. Thank you. You have a question, Shannan. Wonderful.
We have a question from Shannan Halbert.
Tena koutou. Miha ana ki koutou i te ata nei.
Thanks very much for that submission.
Part of me looks at this piece of legislation, and out of all the
things that the government could be focused on at this time,
which is pretty tough for so many working people out there, why do
you think that this has become a top priority for
this government to push through?
Shall I start, Tamara?
I hesitate to
try and explain what's in somebody else's heart, but the effect of
this legislation is to
funnel wealth upwards and away from working people.
That's the effect of it. I can only speculate on what the motivation
might be,
and I think that I would ask the select committee to ask who is being
served here. As the CTU said, actually, it's not going to make employers'
lives easier, but it may save them some money.
Tamara?
Why do I think this government is focusing on this?
Because this government doesn't give a damn about the average working person
in New Zealand. They've screwed us over already.
They're just trying to do it again and to a deeper-
Christian
... level.
Kia ora.
We have a question from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. There's been a lot of focus on this bill on rest and
recreation.
Yes.
For members of your union who have
a primary job and then they have a secondary job in order
to earn more money for whatever purposes they choose for
that money to be used for, does your union charge them fees on both
jobs?
We have a fee structure
that depends on the hours that people work.
That's our current fee structure.
So when we talk about employers only being interested in money, does that
apply to the union's financial model for membership as well?
Absolutely not.
We invest pretty much every cent of members' money in
organizing and empowering working people for a better life, and our
submission here is part of our aim to create better
lives for working people. So kia ora for the question.
Thank you very much for your participation in this process,
Rachel and Tamara. We do appreciate it.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
Now we have got the New Zealand Dairy Workers Union.
Chris Flash, I believe we have you online.
It'll be a good one.
Kia ora.
Welcome, Chris. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions, and we will leave it with
you to manage that, and it's now your time.
Kia ora, thanks. Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Chris Flash tōku ingoa.
Thanks for this opportunity to present to the committee on this bill.
I want to acknowledge the other submitters that have made important points, and
also in our written submissions support those.
I wanted to highlight today quite a critical issue for us in the dairy industry
that you may be aware of this, you may not be,
that we think there's some serious implications for dairy processing
hidden in this bill.
In particular, it relates to annualised hour system.
We talk a bit about this in our written submission.
I'll take that as read, and I don't really want to go into chapter and verse into
that, but it is important. Probably a number of you have not been around
dairy processing sites or other related sites and the use of annualised hours.
It is a very complicated system that's highly used across Fonterra,
all food ingredients, which is the OFI group in Tokoroa, Miraka,
Melody Dairies, and not just in dairy processing.
We are aware that Downer's Construction and other groups use
annualised hours. Why is it so critical?
Annualised hours effectively takes a seasonal
product, be it dairy, and turns that into a
full-time role for people. And we don't have this challenge
that we have in so many other parts of the primary industry of, yes, we're never
going to change the seasonal nature of the product, but not having
workforces that are tuned and burned through seasonal hire and fire
processes, and annualised hours is a critical component
that we have used in the dairy processing industry for many years to
achieve that. And as you'll see from the economic
results in dairy processing and the role that dairy plays in the
economy, I would put some serious warning into all members, particularly
National Party members who, in your own electorates, could have some very
unintended consequences around this
proposed change. Particularly, it's around the accruing
instead of allocating annual leave.
That's going to severely disrupt those annualised hours
arrangements.
We have a system that allows annual leave hours to be accrued as you
go. Workers perform those standard hours, and the act will take away
the ability to receive an allocation of annual holidays at the beginning of the
season and plan and use those holidays during their annualised
hours salary year. The loss of planning for the season is to the
detriment of both workers and dairy employers.
We're in discussions with Fonterra around this.
We are aware that Fonterra and a number of employers have submitted.
We feel that there is some very serious issues around the calculation.
Now, I know in 10 minutes we probably don't have time to delve into that.
That's not probably the time to go into all the technical areas
around how annualised hours are going to be impacted.
But we would say that one of the key issues that we need to
see, first is this bill actually being removed
completely. But if it isn't going to be removed, we would ask for
some very clear exclusion clauses for the protection of collective agreements.
Particularly part 2 of Schedule 1 of the bill at Item 6 regarding
provisions of employment agreements to comply with the Act should be
reworded to give unions the option to exclude collective
agreements from the compliance requirements of the transitional
arrangements and be followed by exclusion clauses which
allow the option for collective agreement arrangements to stay in place
as status quo to be determined by the relevant
unionWe must have holiday leave legislation that properly
accounts the extensive range of shift patterns and annualised hours
arrangements in multiple collective agreements in the dairy industry.
These annualised hour arrangements allow us to deliver these intensified
work during the season and especially during the flush, but
then effectively workers have banked those hours.
It gives the ability for workers and employers under annualised hours to
work through those intense periods, banking hours, building them
up, and so then in the off season, they don't effectively have to be
made redundant or take time off. They're actually paid and
build that payment back for working through those hours.
So in order to meet annualised hours' needs, many collective agreements that
the DW are party to rely on that current Section 17 of the
Holidays Act, which is how employees' entitlement to annual holidays
may be met, which states that an employer and employee may
agree on how an employee's entitlement to four weeks annual holidays is to
be met based on what genuinely constitutes a working week for the employee.
We would submit in the case the bill becomes law, that current Holiday
Act provision should be brought over to any new legislation to preserve
Holiday Act arrangements to provide for that flush.
This is a highly technical area, and I do know that Fonterra has sought an
extension of transitional arrangements. We would support that.
I think this is an area that does need to be unpacked.
We would submit again that the essence of the bill is not needed, but
if you are to proceed with this, there is some very serious
issues in relation to the operation of annualised hours in a highly
profitable, highly effective, and highly productive industry.
That's not the case in many other industries in the primary sector, and
I would ask the select committee to take some time to delve
into this issue, because there could be quite a few unintended consequences for
one of New Zealand's most important, productive, and
economically successful sectors.
I know I've taken far too much time talking, and you'll want to ask questions, so
I'll shut up now and hand over to the committee.
Thank you, Chris. Actually, you've given us ample time.
I have a question here from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much. And thanks, Chris, for the submission.
I'm putting aside, if I can call it the boilerplate comment from a union,
that we should just not proceed with the bill.
As the member of Parliament for Whanganui, which includes, obviously, Hawera and
Stratford, both important areas that you reference, appreciate this
challenge that you've raised-
Yeah
... and would obviously be more than happy to meet with
local members in relation to this.
But from a practical solution perspective, rather than
simply have a leave collective agreements alone,
because that assumes that unions across all industries have
this right, and I just think that that is not a
realistic statement to make. Would there be,
or would it be appropriate to have some form of industry
carve-out that the minister or the ministry was able to
determine on appropriate cases like the one that
you've described,
instead of simply saying, "As unions, we've got this right"?
Look, to answer the question, first and foremost, I would say that in
relation to the dairy industry, and I reiterate our submission, this
isn't an area where we have low union involvement.
The Dairy Workers Union and other related unions such as E tū and
UA, we cover over 90, 95% of all workers in this
industry. So in dairy processing, we have a very
long and proud history of over 85 years of engagement.
So in any discussions around that, that's why we say the collective
agreement clauses in this industry should be
adhered to and honored.
So in that dairy industry. It's not like we're a small player that sits on the
edge. And this is a standard term that many new players, such as Allyn Food
Ingredients, Medaka, Melody Dairies, .
But I think the key word there was, in this industry.
Medaka. Yeah.
And that's the point. And so I think we're agreed on that point.
Yeah.
That it's not across the board, all collective agreements
in every industry. You've actually made the point, which is in this industry.
So thanks .
Yep. And in terms of the second point, we would be open for discussions about
where there is related industries, because you may be aware in construction, there
is similar terms as well. So there's a need to be looking at how annualised
hours needs to be discussed.
Can I-- Oh, yeah. Go for it, Grant. You go for it.
So
obviously one of the reasons for the whole change in this
bill coming forward was the level of complexity that people have
been struggling with for quite some time.
You clearly have not had that issue in the dairy sector
at all.
It's a highly complicated area, but we've been able to, over
decades of work with annualised hours and across many
employers,
find a solution that we feel, it needs ongoing work, but a
solution that provides our seasonal industry
with full-time, permanent labor jobs.
And I want to really go to this point because this is what we're struggling in so
much of the primary sector, where we have sectors such as pip fruit,
horticulture, forestry, and chain and burn, where people come in for a small
season. Even red meat, they come in for a while and then they churn out at the end
of the season. Annualised hours is a critical component, and it is
technical and it's complicated, but it has quite a complicated interaction with the
Holidays Act because it provides full-time
employment across a whole season.
And in that off-season, whanau, families, workers don't have to uproot and
move, as you know, out to other industries or other parts of the country.
It's a critical model. We'd like to see this model actually applied across many
other parts of the primary sector.
We think it's got real ability to solve many of our problems and
productivity issues across the primary sector.
And so I would just challenge that in terms of this interaction, there
could be quite a nuanced interaction between annualised hours and the
proposed Holidays Act amendments.
So we'd like to have that opportunity maybe to take that offline and delve into
that further. It is still complicated.
The Holidays Act has issues, no doubt about that.
But the underlying assumption in this
bill is the removal of work rights, and we do not believe that that is
inherently the right way to approach this matter.
As a dairy farmer, I appreciate your
comments. Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you, Chris, for your submission. We'll leave it there.
We've reached the end of our time with you.
Appreciate your submission and being part of our
select committee process, as usual.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to Toi Matahora.
We have Steve Huring
joining us in the room. Ah. It's refreshing. Welcome, Steve.
Well, I thought there'd be more here in person, but no. It's a new age.
It is a new age, indeed.
Welcome. I'm sorry, I don't have the names of your-
Oh
... colleagues, but I'm sure you can introduce yourself. We've got time for you.
Ten minutes includes time for questions, and we'll hand it over to you now.
Okay. Thanks for that. So I'm Steve Huring, the industrial director at ASMS.
With me is Virginia Mills, our senior policy advisor, and James Roberts,
our policy and research advisor.
So as you probably know, we are the union representing
senior doctors and dentists, the consultants.
We have more than 6,000 members across the Ministry of Health, Te Whatu Ora, Health
New Zealand, the Accident Compensation Corporation, and many other smaller
healthcare providers.
Okay, our main issue, as has been highlighted already,
is
this bill will lead to less leave for lots and lots of
workers who currently have guaranteed access to full public
holidays and a full four weeks annual leave at the moment.
And more corrosively, it will lead to less leave pay.
And so by our calculations, there's going to be a massive
transfer of millions and millions of dollars from employees to
employers as a result of this bill.
And that is because it effectively discounts any rate other than
the standard ordinary hourly rate for lots of
hours. The complexity is mind-boggling.
One of the great features of the current act is that it can
account for a diverse number of employment relationships.
Just heard about the dairy workers with annualized
hours.
All our doctors
have to do call requirements.
In other words, they have to take part in a roster in their departments and do a
certain amount of hours overnight on call.
Now, those hours are paid at T 1.5. This bill
basically strips the 0.5 off the T and
turns that into T1. So for every doctor,
effectively when they take leave, there's going to be
quite a large reduction in pay. And those call
requirements are quite oppressive and onerous.
Lots of doctors try and get off call as they get older,
but it's just one of the things that makes the health system work, and this is
going to completely disincentivize people doing call.
And so by our calculations, just on that
calculation alone, for 6,000-odd
doctors,
it's in the order of $15 million being transferred from
employees to the employer.
The complexity
is a real serious issue. So at the moment,
everyone gets a week. You can calculate what a week is just by ordinary weekly
pay or average weekly earnings. This requires
really, really complex accounting for standard hours, additional
hours. Which type of payment did you get?
Was it an event-based payment? Was it an hourly-based payment?
Was it a payment with penal rates? There's a complexity in this that as
we were writing our submission, we even struggled with.
So it's actually moved, in our view, from a relatively simple system
to a very, very complex
system.
Loss of public holidays, that's a concern, as is the four weeks,
as was raised by other unions. We've got a particular concern about
clause 17, multiple roles.
It's a
very strange thing. It's got no corresponding thing in the current Public Holidays
Act. It appears to be inserted to deal with a
case that we won in the Employment Relations Authority, which just basically
says you can't take leave if you've got different
leave balances and different roles with the same employer.
So, we've had an anesthetist who also worked in the ICU just
down the corridor, four doors away at Auckland Hospital.
To be more flexible to the employer, they decided to
drop their hours in one role and pick up hours in the other, so they were split
between the two. They started with a zero leave
balance in the new role. Could they use any of their four
weeks leave in their primary role? No, they couldn't.
Couldn't take a whole week off because they were split in split roles.
It's
an administrative nightmare that was
particular to Auckland Hospital, isn't practiced in any other DHB
in the country, and appears to have been put up, we
believe, by Health New Zealand to actually just overturn that
employment decision.
So that's a great concern. Rushed in, we believe.
What is the role? And, as we say in our submission,
we think it will
count against the employer's ability to use their employees
flexibly as well. Now, you will all have heard of occasions where
production line A slows down. It would be great if employees could take leave from
that role and maybe pick up something else.
But no, this bill will basically say, "Hey, your leave balances are
siloed to a particular role in a particular factory or a particular
organization." So you're taking away the flexibility for the employer as
well.
We have a big issue about the incentivization of casualization.
At the moment, we've got in the health system, lots of people, not necessarily our
members, but lots of people who you would describe as permanent
casuals.But they get to have leave,
and their permanent casual status gives both the employer and the
employee quite a lot of flexibility to fill in gaps in the health system.
There are a lot of gaps in the health system.
At the moment, those people get leave.
They will be designated as casuals under the system. They won't get leave.
They'll get compensation instead.
And I just think this is a backward step
against the objects of the act of providing
universal leave for everyone.
Picking up on
the dairy workers,
what we call is an undue limitation on freedom to contract.
So this bill repeats the existing legislation that says if you contract
for any provisions that are better than the act,
you're entitled to have those. Freedom of negotiation, fundamental
right. But then the bill goes on to say later in transitional
arrangements,
but whatever you negotiate will have to abide by the structure,
the complex structure of this bill, and you will have to move to an
hourly-based accrual system. And I just don't think that
those two concepts sit side by side.
Freedom to negotiate
better conditions, just like the dairy workers have,
just like arguably we have in our union,
and then be confined to basically applying a very
strict,
what I would describe as a system that's designed for the gig economy, where
basically everyone's treated like an hourly worker.
So,
I just think there's lots and lots-- I think the drafters of this bill
have not taken into account the diversity of employment relationships in the
country.
Stock workers who come in from the bush for two weeks and go back in for two weeks,
fishermen who go to sea and then have a certain amount of time off,
dairy workers, whatever,
doctors doing call at night, it just hasn't accounted for that.
And at the moment, we've got a system that we can actually work with.
As was pointed out, Section 17 allows us to enter into negotiation about
what constitutes a working week.
There's been very little litigation on Section 17 of the act
about what is a working week.
So we would regard that as an indication that things are working.
I think I'll leave it at that
and welcome any questions.
Great. I have a question for you, a little provocative.
What came first, the chicken or the egg?
Because the reason that
we're talking about the issues today are a result
of, I think, a long period of time where
employers have adapted to the Holidays Act.
Everything that you're talking about, my understanding, and correct me if I'm
wrong, is a result of working with the Holidays Act.
So I'm assuming you've
taken the Holidays Act and worked that into your collective agreements with your
employees.
Yeah.
Would you not think that over a period of time you would then adapt
to this piece of legislation and build that then into your
collective agreements, and then by proxy,
employers that don't have
staff in unions or with collective agreements would then say, "Right, this helps
us be more flexible, and therefore we will then
arrange our staff
allotment," whether it's how they put someone from one space into another
space in their employment as a result of the
changes here?
Well, I think the bill has
evolved since 1945, and then, the Factories Act before that,
and it's evolved in a way that, as I said, has had
very little litigation about how people have worked.
Firefighters who work two weeks on, two weeks off
basically have worked out a definition of
leave that conforms with the Holidays Act, but they can't move to
that with their shift systems. They can't move to this system.
I just think this system--
Well, if you're implying that this system should start redefining employment
relationships, I think that's the wrong way around.
The Holidays Act should basically be trying to provide paid leave
for all sorts of employment relationships.
It shouldn't be then basically putting everyone in a straitjacket and saying, "Hey,
you need to change." We can't change necessarily the way doctors do
call. You
go
on call, you're on availability provision.
You can be in there all night, or you can be in there for just an hour, and
why would we change that around
to fit into
some sort of administrative thing?
I do believe this has been driven by the payroll companies.
Business New Zealand, the CTU, and MBIE basically had a consensus about what needed
to be changed in the Holidays Act,
and then, as we know, there was a very sudden change.
What we do know is there was massive lobbying by payroll companies, and the payroll
companies are actually responsible for some of the cock-ups in
Holidays Act remediation. They basically built systems that didn't do what the
Holidays Act was supposed to do.
Millions have been spent in the health system fixing those up.
They are now fixed, they are now working, and they're actually calculating leave
correctly, and payroll companies have got off
scot-free,
I think, in their responsibility for that.
Now the payroll companies have come back and said, "Hey, we want to revert to the
system that was wrong in the first place, that we've spent a lot of
money fixing up."
Mm-hmm.
"We'd actually like to revert back to those very simple systems,
and then try and drive employment relationships and employment
arrangements to fit our simplistic
hour-based
legislation," which is not simple.
Three categories of hours,
five categories of income that you have to calculate of which goes where.
It's
going to lead to masses of litigation.
There's a long answer to your short question.
We have a quick question from Vanessa Wayne.
Great answer.
Thank you very much. The current system that is in
place allows for quite a lot of variability and
individual arrangements in turn with
the collective agreements.
Do you see that it is problematic in any way?
No, I don't. Look, the industry is full
of quite interesting shift systems, 12 hours on,
12 hours off, like a paper mill or whatever.
And those shift systems, and those rotating
shift systems don't accord exactly with a seven-day cycle.
But they've
easily come up with definitions of a week so that they
can take their leave and not disrupt the shift cycle.
So in other words, they've basically come up with definitions of a week that fit
into
those shift rosters. So you take your leave, just like the firefighters do when
you're off work.
Rather than when you're shift working.
And you guarantee to be on the job, not take leave when you're on the shift.
Mm-hmm.
That's absolutely through the industry, and this is going to overturn all that.
This just basically says you can take an hour off whenever you like, and
you'll accrue on hours. And it's not going to
conform-
It's not
... to people getting the equivalent of four weeks off.
Okay. Thank you very much. We've reached the end-
Thank you
... of our time with you. Appreciate your contribution to our process.
Thank you.
Committee will take a break-
Cool
... now until 10:25.
10:25.
Good.
Thank you.
And we'll just go live. Thank you. And we've got morning tea
from Phil, very kindly.